# Data integration pipeline


1. Data lands into a raw zone (s3/bronze/) 
2. Data procesing (with some feature extraction), validation, and canonical modelling (pydantic) (s3/silver/*/records.delta)
3. Silver data loading into "silver" data vault
3. Deduplicate silver delta table into (s3/silver/*/deduplicated.parquet)
4. Data auditing of samples of processed data (great expectations) (s3/silver/audits)
5. Data deduplication and matching (Splink) where we store entity resolution results (s3/silver/integrated)
5. Data loading into gold data vault (pyarrow + deltatables) using data vault 2.0 architecture (s3/gold/)
6. Data aggregation for data marts (s3/gold/marts)



# Setup 

Setup can be done via make commands:

- Start necessary Docker containers (Minio and Postgres) with:
```
make infra_up
```

- Stop Docker containers (Minio and Postgres) with:
```
make infra_down
```

- Check Docker containers status (Minio and Postgres) with:
```
make infra_status
```


# Execution workflow

1. Upload test data to S3 bucket `data` in `bronze` area:

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/upload_bronze.py
```

This will upload all the files in `tests/data/` to Minio, e.g., `data/bronze/business_entity_registry/business_entity_registry.csv`


2. Process bronze data S3 bucket `data` and writes to S3 bucket `data` in `silver` folder.

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/process_bronze_and_load_to_delta_silver.py
```

Note that data is read and written into S3 directly without landing into a local folder. Depending on the requirements and workflow bottleneck, this could change, and we could first download to local, e.g., if we want to distribute a file into batches of data and process those in parallel. As with everything, it depends on the business context.

This will process all the data in the bronze layer, and write them to a per-data source delta table, e.g., `data/silver/business_entity_registry/records.delta`. This allows us to track over-time changes in data, and potentially rollback to specific versions or timestamps. Note that the delta tables are split by partition keys, which are defined in the respective data model, e.g., `src/data_integration_pipeline/core/data_processing/data_models/data_sources/business_entity_registry.py`. For example for business entity registries, we set the partition key to the field `city` meaning that the data table is split according to the city, if the field is empty, it's instead assigned to the `UNKNOWN` partition.

Note that: 

- invalid rows are archived in `data/errors/processsing/`, e.g., `data/errors/processsing/business_entity_registry/errors.parquet` 
- bronze/raw data is archive in `data/archive/`


3. Run data auditing on the delta tables

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/audit_silver.py
```

You can check the results by running:
```
make audit_docs
```

This will launch a local server exposing the HTML documents generated by great expectation, which you can check by going to `http://localhost:8080/`


4. Deduplicate silver data based on each of the data models' primary key.

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/deduplicate_silver_data.py
```

Elimitation of duplicates is based on the 1. whether the record is active (if info is available) and 2.0 the fill count of each flat record. We could also modify the data model to include a `global_score` based on other metrics. See `DuplicatesProcessor._deduplicate_silver` for more information. This step is "*optional*", but **recommended if the primary keys are strong indicators of data redundancy**.

Note that this step takes a snapshot of the last state of the delta table and creates a deduplicated data, which is then fed into downstream steps. For example the deduplicated data of `data/silver/business_entity_registry/records.delta` is stored as `data/silver/business_entity_registry/deduplicated.parquet`


5. Run entity resolution via Splink with deduplication and linking on the `deduplicated.parquet` files. This will assign each record to a cluster, which we process in the next step.

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/run_entity_resolution.py
```

This step is at the moment quite rudimentary, since Splink depends on training/pre-trained expectation-maximization models, performing entity resolution with small small datasets is not quite feasible. For example, for the current data, we achived this overlap:

```
business_entity_registry: 99
business_entity_registry + licenses_registry: 33
business_entity_registry + licenses_registry + sub_contractors_registry: 3
business_entity_registry + sub_contractors_registry: 6
licenses_registry: 119
sub_contractors_registry: 127
```
This is not significant and not representative of real entity resolution, but since the data is synthetically generated (and very small), results are subpar.


Note that entity resolution can be run multiple times, where each run is associated with a different hash key e.g., `data/entity_resolution/019cb3cc-a219-7f16-b8fd-f88d5bebb883`
**In the next steps, if multiple runs are found, we always take the run with the latest timestamp**

Note that we store this information per run:
- `model.json` represents the Splink model
- `metadata.json` contains run metadata, e.g.,
```
{'run_id': '019cb3d0-c21a-7560-afca-9f5ecc0d36b1', 'links_s3_path': 'entity_resolution/019cb3d0-c21a-7560-afca-9f5ecc0d36b1/links.parquet', 'timestamp': '2026-03-03T13:08:49.692596+00:00', 'execution_context': {'data_integration_pipeline_version': '0.0.1', 'python_version': '3.11.14', 'splink_version': '4.0.15'}, 'inputs': {'table_names': ['business_entity_registry', 'licenses_registry', 'sub_contractors_registry'], 'per_source_records_count': {'business_entity_registry': 141, 'licenses_registry': 155, 'sub_contractors_registry': 136}, 'records_count': 432}, 'outputs': {'links_count': (432,), 'clusters_count': 387}, 'model_metadata': {'splink_inference_predict_threshold': 0.01, 'splink_clustering_threshold': 0.9, 'settings_hash': '5f2fc7d557f9c29f7cfcaccc7b102758'}, 'overlap_report': {'business_entity_registry': 99, 'business_entity_registry + licenses_registry': 33, 'business_entity_registry + licenses_registry + sub_contractors_registry': 3, 'business_entity_registry + sub_contractors_registry': 6, 'licenses_registry': 119, 'sub_contractors_registry': 127}}
```
- `links.parquet` contains the actual links (i.e., clusters) found by Splink

Besides the aforementioned points, there are 2 things we could improve upon:

- version and store Splink models in Mlflow
- expose links lineage and metadata for better entity resolution auditing

6. The next step processes all clusters formed by Splink and creates "integrated" records, where we:
    1. Evaluate each record according to record depth and record consensus with other records
    2. Per list of records define an anchor record (highest score record from `business_entity_registry` or `sub_contractors_registry`)
    3. Define an anchor record (which will represent the integrated record) and alternative entities, i.e., other records within the same cluster.
    4. Apply survivorship rules to fill out the integrated record data model

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/create_integrated_records.py
```

For more information check `src/data_integration_pipeline/core/entity_resolution/integrated_record.py` and in particular the `from_cluster` function

7. After generating the integrated records, we run another deduplication step, where we deduplicate the records based on their primary key and data source. Here we the fields `is_active` and `global_score` to rank duplicate records

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/deduplicate_integrated_records.py
```

8. The last step is to create the gold records which represent the entities which are consumed by downstream business-oriented analysts.

```
python src/data_integration_pipeline/jobs/create_gold_records.py
```

This is done by:
1. Getting all the anchor integrated records and storing them in `anchors.parquet` file
2. Each alternative entity in the integrated records is then linked to the anchor `id_bridge.file`
3. We create a table with each anchor and alternative entity as rows. Ideally this step would actually just be a materialization of the link between anchors and the id bridge, but since we are working with a local duckdb instance, we materialize the data instead. Nonetheless, the data architecture for this is there, the rest is just "setup"



# TODO
- add airflow sensors and respective orchestration. I've already started (see `dags`), but will need a few more days to wrap that up
- Improve entity resolution : add better auditing for splink matches, model logging (Mlflow) and better Splink settings. This is the weakest point of this POC, but also natural due to the nature of the input data.
- The IO objects don't have a well standardized protocol, so it ought to be improved. I'm using delta-scan in duckdb but then also have clients for each. This needs to be better standardized
- Add more metrics, auditing, etc. At the moment we only really have logs, but this could be substantially improved. 
- The pydantic data models schema and data model is redundant for integrated and gold records, and we need a better way to handle it